I'm here today talking about design
because design is my Trojan horse into
the whole world of creativity but we
could be talking art we're in the family
here we don't have to really look at
different labels what I would like to
talk to you about anyway today is our
near future I'm not a futurologist I've
never been able really to talk about the
future but I see just a few hints and I
try to make them mine make them yours
and I try to show them to the world and
what I see right now is three main areas
that are of interest to me and that I
would like to explore more using quantum
as a guideline
you know Civic entanglement the fact
that now more than ever we see artists
and designers being really overtly
unashamedly interesting politics and
just coming back from the opening of the
Venice Biennial old art there was a
refreshingly wonderfully riveting Lee
political exhibition this year and so
much so that a few people from the art
world were irritated by it I like it
what that happened then creative
encoding you know we're talking about
poetic computation here and that kind of
poetic computation is not only in the
digital realm it's also in the
biological realm I really love the fact
that coding the idea of being able to
jumpstart instructions and algorithms is
really pervading so many different
fields and last but not last incubating
the arts what curators like me and like
many others are doing to incubate new
forms of art and make them become kind
of a platform in museums and in other
institutions for the world at large
quantum computers do I know how they
work no nobody really does and I love
how scientists you know scientists are
also kind of at a loss but they work and
really really cool temperatures you
can't touch them because the moment
there's like even the slight slightest
disturbance they go completely awry
they look like something like this but
I'm not really sure that this picture is
really true
and I love this article me Rhonda tremor
wrote this beautiful article in the new
inquiry three years ago that was
completely speculative about quantum
computers but she was so obsessed and
she wanted to go and get to see one and
there's very few that are really
operative so she started dating this guy
that had access to the one at Yale just
for that and then he sniffed her out so
she didn't get to see that computer it
doesn't really matter but what I loved
is that in this beautiful article she
wrote look at this you know she wrote
that piece but look at what pops out
delicate quirks and unpredictability the
efficacy of ambivalence or ambiguity my
heart beats faster ambivalence and
ambiguity are smart collaborators that
not only share their uncertainty but
sharpen it into a precise mode of
communication how wonderful that's what
we want to be right and that's where we
are and quantum design can be seen in
these two different the difference
between these two develop set of robots
of speculative robots up on top you see
Bob de Graaff old-school robots they're
there to take care of us you know like
what was her name in the Jetsons you
know what I'm talking about just take
Rosie thank you so much taking care of
us always predictable always dependable
and instead done in rabies robots
quite the opposite neurotic demanding
needy they're not going to do anything
for you until you cuddle them look at
them in the eyes eliminate magnetic
fields and then only then will they
perhaps start collaborating with you so
it really is difficult to know what
design can bring when it's inspired by
this kind of quantum mechanics but Civic
entanglement you know civic entanglement
is this need to not only be political
but also understand politics at a much
broader level when I started at MoMA
21 years ago I one of my first sorry
proposal for acquisitions was a Beretta
you know here I come from Italy design
is firm follows function
in this case the beretta is a beautiful
function and a beautiful form right I
mean not very beautiful function but the
form was beautiful and I was very proud
because I had heard that it had been
adopted by the New York Police
Department and all of a sudden
I get told no no no we do not collect
guns all right why don't we collect guns
because what you see is what you get in
the design department form indeed
follows function therefore the function
of a gun is to kill therefore it cannot
be part of the collection and so but
there's a lot of it in the art in the
painting is Katra collection oh yeah but
that's a metaphor that's a means to an
end
so I started thinking about it and
recently I bumped into this amazing
video George Nelson you know George
Nelson staple of the history of American
design in 1960 did this amazing video
for CBS on how to kill people and he
said that killing people was a problem
of design Minh it's very subtle you
should see it because it is not at all
ironic but because it's not ironic it's
devastating and I'm sure that his
intention was the opposite of what might
seem so this kind of ambiguity and
ambivalence is extremely interesting and
when you look at objects like this the
ambiguity and ambivalence and the
tension between the goal and the
perfection of the design is something
that still bugs me a lot so much so that
when a more ambivalent and ambiguous
feat happened a few years ago and the 3d
printed gun was announced I almost had a
crisis of identity and kidding but I was
really stunned not only by the 3d
printer gang but my own reaction to it
my own reaction was one of disbelief how
can it be that something as benign as a
3d printing machine doei and how can it
be that design can go so wrong and
open-source and everything that I stood
for and then five minutes later I had a
bad reaction to my own bad reaction
saying you're you're really silly or
apollyon that design can go wrong it has
gone wrong it will go wrong and it's
better we all as designers start
thinking about it because we tend to
always highlight the benign aspects of
it and at the same time also Steven
Pinker's book the better angels of our
nature was published and it was a book
it's a book that argues that our society
is becoming less violent and indeed it's
becoming less violent in certain aspects
of violence that are millennia old but
there are new subtle forms of violence
that
perhaps he does not take into account
and so I started thinking about it and
thinking of looking at the world in the
only way that I know how to do through
objects of design and I started making a
collection of objects that have an
ambiguous relationship with violence and
putting them together in a line then of
course I co-opted my partner-in-crime
dreamer hunt who is a fantastic curator
and we started putting together a
proposal for an exhibition we proposed
the exhibition it got rejected because
maybe it was not such a good idea to
have a whole room or galleries filled
with like plastic handcuffs and you know
and ak-47s and euthanasia roller
coasters but we decided not to throw
away this idea and to make it happen
online and this is the design and
violence site that has been going on for
the past two and a half years every week
we've been oh one and a half sorry
every week we published a different
object that has an ambiguous
relationship with violence you see a few
there from Natalie Jeremy Jenkins and
Chris Walken beetle wrestler that
enables a human being to be scaled down
to the to the scale of a beetle and the
beetle is the strongest animal in nature
so you can kind of arm wrestle with a
beetle to the ak-47 to the tear drop
tattoo you know just all these different
objects that symbolise violence that are
not necessarily aestheticizing it but
rather bring us on the brink of what it
could be and it was really fantastic
because every week we had a very
authoritative person write about it we
were able to get at the beginning some
really generous authors like anne-marie
slaughter was the first she's always the
best and then William Gibson also
started this whole trend and then we
were able to make this Avalanche happen
but what I find really fantastic is that
what happened because of a rejection
became actually a strength I don't think
we would have been able to have this
happen in the white box you know we were
talking before about beyond the white
box thinking out of the white box well
this kind of curatorial experiment is to
me a
a new way for my own experience to be
able to communicate to the public you
know there were so many different topics
that we were able to tackle from you
know the role of women in Muslim
countries especially during the Arab
Spring to how political ads can lie
overtly because they're not about truth
in advertising but rather about freedom
of speech so this beautiful website that
collects untruthful overtly misleading
as political ads is incredible or the
near big pistol which is a pistol that
is manufactured and produced by the
Indian government to be distributed to
women so they can defend themselves from
rape so that's the solution in a way a
form of violence or the plastic
handcuffs and in the case of the plastic
handcuffs we had judge Shira Sheindlin
write the piece she is the woman the
judge the hero that declared stop and
frisk unconstitutional in New York two
years ago so serious matters talked
about by serious people and it's funny
how Zac was talking about asking the
right question and at the end of every
essay we asked a question
his execution always ugly is euthanasia
form of violence or a form of compassion
can we design a violent act to be more
humane questions are so important for us
today and the answers were fantastic you
know the box cutter for instance that's
become such a symbol of violence for
Americans after 9/11 led to the to the
question which other invisible everyday
objects can become lethal weapons and
not all the contributions were text you
know we have here you see the you hear
jad a boom rod who contributed this
beautiful piece that's made only using
these sounds
and it's almost ominous you know it's
almost like a scary threatening sound
and then on the left hand side we said
crystal diamond and his gifs that are
about war by extracurricular means the
book I'm sorry the the project right now
is becoming a book because after
rejecting the project the exhibition
MoMA decided the website was great and
wanted to also make a book so it's
really post digital the book is coming
out next week I think and that we also
had a few pieces in the in the gallery
and what I really love is that we also
had this live debates like Oxford style
debates really serious we had one about
the 3d printed gun but the motion was
not about gun control the motion was
about open source and Cody Wilson the
designer of the 3d printed gun was
arguing for the motion which open source
had not has to remain completely free no
matter the consequences and instead
against him argued Rob Walker and I
don't know how many of you know the
wonderful Rob Walker he looks and sounds
like the crypto anarchist much more than
Cody Wilson and it was a fabulous
conversation we had one about empathy
we had one about killing animals and
next week we're going to have the last
one closing of the whole project we're
gonna have Bella Coleman and Larry
Lessig talk about the open Internet so
it's become a platform for so much but
what is most moving I think and what
really is enabled by the platform of the
web is that we were able to talk about
really serious matters and to get out of
the normal white box that is the museum
audiences and people that are experts in
design so you see here this is the
euthanasia roller coaster which is a
speculative project by an RCA graduate
that is a roller coaster that
progressively deprives your brain more
and more of oxygen at the end of the
roller coaster you're dead so in a way
it's about dying gently or in a kind of
elating way and the question that we ask
is is euthanasia form of violence or a
form of compassion one of the comments
that we got was from somebody that
is in constant pain and she was saying
you know to some people some people
think that death is necessarily a
tragedy but sometimes life is a tragedy
so when you get answers like that you
realize that finally you've been able to
break the white box that finally art a
museum the kind of cultural institution
can be a way to talk about really
serious matters you also realize weird
things if you look at these two posts
one is the serpentine ramp by Temple
Grandin the redesign of the
slaughterhouse and the comment was by
Ingrid Newkirk the president of PETA on
the on the right hand side is our last
post of two two weeks ago about the
death penalty and the lethal injection
and the commentaries by Ricky Jackson
who's been recently exonerated after 39
years on death row so excuse me two
serious matters look at this a hundred
and twenty four comments about killing
animals two comments about killing human
beings so interesting you know you get
to understand so much more about people
and about your audience by doing
experiments of this kind but you know so
that was about the Civic entanglement
being entangled with the world and being
more politically engaged creative
encoding is about instead trying to help
mutations and direct them in the right
possibilities you know as a curator MoMA
has been doing that for quite a while
studying all this different kind of
creative encoding you see there in the
background mutant materials in
contemporary design well let's kind of I
just wanted to celebrate something with
you because in two days it's gonna be
the 20th anniversary of the MoMA website
which I coded by myself yeah I learned
HTML it's pretty horrible you still have
it here they know you can still get on
it but it's it's great it has the whole
checklist but so already this idea in
that case the idea was the materials at
last could be customized and kind of
designed by the designers themselves so
designer didn't have to go to a chemical
engineer or to a scientist to change the
nature of materials that could do it in
their own studios because
new resins enabled them to to fine-tune
better and you know new composites so it
was about giving the tools to designers
and you see the next step is given the
biological tools to designers and you've
seen design in the elastic mind where we
had some of the great work by so many of
you here and so many of the people that
were in the conference in the past few
days we also had some of the first bio
design works and then a colleague of
mine William Myers at MoMA did the book
bio design and we started really going
down that path of bio design and
synthetic biology as forms of creative
encoding the work of symbiotic I don't
know how many of you are familiar with
them great designers and artists based
in Perth Australia that kind of launched
this whole bio design and bio art
movement many years ago we had in the
exhibition design and elastic mind that
victimless leather that little leather
coat it was just this big that was made
of mouse stem cells that scared the
bejesus out of every body at MoMA I
didn't tell them while we were putting
it in that it was live and it was an
incubator and then at some point I had
you know it was growing too fast and the
designers were back you know it's this
is a funny story
the designers were back in Australia and
it was growing so fast and this sleeve
was dangling and he was getting bigger
and so I asked him what do I do and say
oh you have to stop it excuse me you
turn it off you know it just turned off
the nutrition I'm like no I can't I mean
that would be killing it
and I said no Paul that's never been
alive it's a semi living I'm like it is
alive it was so all of a sudden all of
your deep-seated convictions and all of
your coolness just go down the drain you
know so I love this kind of reaction
that one can have when different worlds
collide right and right now in in two
weeks I will propose for acquisition
this is a secret don't tell anybody
because I'm not supposed to say what I
proposed for acquisition beforehand so
it's only between us the Autodesk 3d
printed virus you know I'm gonna see
they might say no my committee might say
forget about it but we are at the point
that we can
of course we've been able to design
viruses forever but we can 3d print them
and Andrew Hessel here was the scientist
in residence at Autodesk has been
arguing also about the moral
implications of it all he wrote a
beautiful piece for the Atlantic a few
years ago about hacking the president's
DNA and he's been talking really like
other designers about the possible
consequences of this kind of creative
encoding you see here's the speculative
work of susana Suarez but there's many
others she says personalized bio weapons
are a subtler and less catastrophic
threat than accidental plagues or WMDs
yet they will be likely will they will
likely be unleashed much more readily so
it really is an issue that we have to
tackle as designer as an artist and I
like the work of designers like Revit
Alcorn and Torben Balin that always have
a beautiful way to show the
possibilities in this particular case
they took the king gear which is the
goldfish that has been hybridized by
Japanese culture for a very long time
and have created a machine with which
you can print goldfish that have no
sexual reproductive organs so they
cannot reproduce they are live beings
that are meant to die at some point and
that are completely commodified and they
design the machine so that it can
produce only a batch of 40 and then it
can never work anymore so they want to
do it only once to demonstrate but then
no more I like the fact that there's so
much work of this kind going all the way
to the extremes of course you know that
Stewart Brand and Ryan feelin's
experiment now about the extinction he
wants to bring back to life animals that
have either long gone or just not so
long gone they want to start with a
passenger pigeon that used to be the
most normal bird in the United States at
the beginning of the 20th century and is
now completely extinct so this kind of
creative encoding is at the same time a
way to really redefine reality and an
also way to understand more about our
own nature
and it is important for curators and for
institutions to incubate these new types
of art and design that help people
really understand better what the future
can be museums like MoMA museums like
the new museum with the new ink museums
like SF MoMA so many museums in the
world are now trying to really give a
platform for this new type of art and
this new type of design and you know at
MoMA have been discussing it for quite a
while also with the Department of
research and development believe it or
not MoMA has an R&D department which I
found it it's a lot of our and very
little D because it's half of me and one
12-month intern but we started three
years ago and the R is really good and
one day we'll be able to do the deep so
MoMA research and development it's it's
almost like a little bit of a reality
check and a conscience tool for MoMA
what I'm really concerned about but I
don't talk about it too overtly because
people think that I am a little freaky
is survival frankly I mean museums have
to entangle themselves more with
people's needs and reality in order to
survive not historical museums to
historical to fail museums like the big
British Museum Luther or the Met those
are not endangered because they really
preserve the patrimony of humankind not
Science Museum because it's proven that
they are necessary to the basic
curricula for education but in not
community museums because they have this
kind of buttressing function that is
truly important but museums of Modern
and Contemporary Art especially when
they're not able with their art to
communicate directly their importance
and their necessity they need to think
about how to communicate what they do so
MoMA Arendt is about that and we have
been conducting these salons that are
now online if you want to see them on
the website are quite great
there are about topics in which the
museums have has some kind of expertise
but they're also very relevant to the
outside world
from philanthropy to taboos to
copyrights to the move we had a series
of three salons one was the object
online
from physical to ink to digital the
other was the object offline from
digital to physical and then the
connected object of course and it's been
really interesting to discuss how
museums or a moment particular can talk
about these topics while at the same
time collecting and displaying the art
of great quality that we want to be
associated with and that we want to
present to our public it's nothing new
that sometimes curators have to show
their trustees and their committee
members things that are not necessarily
your old type of art there are not
necessarily everybody's cup of tea or
comfort zone you know we were talking
about the Autodesk virus beforehand but
at the beginning of MoMA's history in
the late 1920s the director the founding
director Alfred Barr who was 29 when the
museum was found not not 29 in his late
twenties maybe he was 27 but he was in
his late twenties was showing a lot of
work that was not necessarily considered
art you know you see cubism at the
beginning in the United States had a
little bit of trouble kind of
establishing itself of course years
later when Bill Rubin is talking about a
Picasso retrospective in 1980 because so
it's normal it always takes a while and
that's why you know we'll talk about the
videogames later on it makes me laugh
that people don't have that kind of
memory the first exhibition the first
bonafide exhibition of design was in
1934 by Philip Johnson this great
machine art show in which he took
propeller blades and coils and you know
ball bearings pieces of machinery and
put them on these white pedestals
against the white walls you know as if
they were beautiful Brancusi sculptures
that's the first bona fides submission
and it was the beginning of the
collection but Philip had proposed it
four years ago and it had been rejected
so the first showed that he could do was
a show of furniture so you see I don't
have to complain it's it's like old
history it always happens and it
happened also to some other great
curators like Connie Mildred Constantine
who in the 1960s the great
exhibition on packaging and packaging at
that time was not considered MoMA fodder
or my colleague Kara McCarty who's now
at the cooper-hewitt who did this
gorgeous show diagramming microchips
information art in 1990 and those were
the diagrams used by electronic
engineers to to actually check on the
fitness of microchips so it was really
great and when I found myself trying to
include new categories of design into
the museum collection after the
exhibition design and the elastic mine
in 2008 I had a little bit of a hard
time and I had to use a few stratagems
to get into the collection visualization
design and interfaces and interaction
design but slowly but surely we've been
able at MoMA to make that happen and we
started collecting digital digital fonts
of course fonts we were collecting
before but digital fonts were also a way
to show people more about the world and
to make them understand how important
fonts design is if any even if it is one
of the most how can I say inbuilt forms
of design and thus invisible we started
collecting logos and symbols I mean the
first one was the ad sign I'm
particularly proud of it because if you
look at its history
it's everything you dream of in a design
object its centuries many many centuries
old and it's been recuperated today with
the same meaning that it had were in the
Middle Ages you know I don't know if you
know the story but the first instances
that have been found were handwriting
monks manuscripts they were using that
sign to make a fusion of the two words
in the preposition ad ad the Latin
preposition that meant in relationship
with or two words so they were just like
saving energy and just going blue and
with this little pearl on top and it
remained throughout the centuries with
the same meaning using by merchants by
accountants by all sorts of people that
dealt with commerce to indicate a
relationship between price and quantity
or at the ratio of so when Ray Tom
found himself in 1971 inventing the
email program that was part of the
internet sponsored by DARPA at BBN he
just looked at the keyboard of the
teletype saw this girl did a little
research saw what it meant thought he
was perfect to link the name of the
person to the name of the machine to
just like get rid of all the code in the
middle in the middle that was always
repeating itself adopted it and sent the
first email to talk about the add sign I
mean and it's beautiful and it's in the
public domain and what more do you want
as a curator then an object like this
you know it was just I was so happy that
this could happen but the funniest thing
is that nobody knew how to deal with the
public domain part of it and when people
call us as they do for other objects and
ask us for images flying off from the
collection the copyrights and stuff and
they asked about the add sign we just
tell them you know it's it's on your
keyboard just like push the button and
they're very perplexed and said no no no
no it's really it's yours to just if you
can use American typewriter as a font
because it's the one that's closest to
the teletype phone from 1971 but it's
really perplexing but beautiful because
once they understand it I feel that they
garner a much deeper understanding of
design of art of public domain of the
importance of design in the world so
lately we've been also acquiring the
Creative Commons logo the Google Maps
pin and I love it the on/off button you
know what you see there is the wall is
the is MoMA seen by the guy from the
garden as it is right now so it's really
nice to be able to enter these new types
of design and art into the collection
but the video games which is a something
that we started collecting about four
years ago were particularly interesting
and incendiary to us that's a no-brainer
I mean video games are great forms of
art of design of storytelling of
Technology you name it they condense so
much of what we stand for and in typical
MoMA fashion we took years before we got
to the to the shortlist you know we put
together experts you know from video
game designers to video game scholars we
talked we made a shortlist we
established criteria and we came
down to this list that is my opinion
impeccable and of course to others it's
not but it doesn't really matter I'm
really proud of it and my favorite is
Tempest
I'm sure you all have your favorites you
know so it's really it really is quite
fantastic and then we announced it and I
was amazed because the reaction from the
community was so so positive you know we
had about 550 comments the first day of
the blog post and only a very small part
of those were corrosive and insulting
many were like oh you forgot my favorite
game and but it was quite fantastic and
so we collected video games as a form of
design of interaction design not of art
not of film or animation design
therefore we tried to adopt criteria
that had to do with design and with
architecture you know space time
architecture is the title of one of the
milestones of architectural writing it's
Siegfried Gideon and we decided that
besides space time and architecture when
it came to video games we had to add
aesthetics and behavior as very
important criteria or means to
understand the quality of video games
for MoMA but so considering that we also
went on trying to describe the criteria
better so space you know the space in
which the game exists and evolves and
that's why sometimes architects are so
good and in video game design teams
because spatial performance and the
quality of the space is something that
is very important when you try to think
of a game as a piece of design of course
what you're seeing there is one of the
few games that we could never acquire
because Nintendo was absolutely
unreasonable and so you know just like
in the typefaces and digital fonts
there's no Apple those are the two
companies that did not agree to changing
slightly the EULA in order to let MoMA
have the game in perpetuity because
that's one of the big problems it's like
EULA's can be revoked we cannot really
have a Picasso ownership revoked and and
we considered pac-man Picasso so then
time you know the time in which the
videogame happens you know sometimes
they have their own time other two other
instances they follow the time in the
future for some time
they go on forever I don't know if you
heard about Generation which is this new
video game that you will have to leave
an inheritance to your children because
it lasts longer than human beings I find
it really beautiful or in the case of
passage JSON R or s passage it's five
minutes you are born you go through life
and you die and there's no second level
or second life and you make choices you
know if you live your life by your own
you have an easier time but you died
sooner instead you know so it's really
very philosophical then you know I was
telling you about aesthetics aesthetics
is important but whenever I say
aesthetics it's not just prettiness the
kind of aesthetic intention that I
really love is the one that takes into
account the limits of technology for
instance here in Cold War's the
limitation of this of the processor made
it so that there was an interference a
moment of like scattered interference in
the middle that becomes in the video
game designers mind a way to create an
interesting obstacle that makes the game
even more challenging and then of course
behavior and this is one of the most
interesting parts I told you before no
guns and no weapons in the moment design
collection you can have it in the art
collection painting collection because
they're metaphors but not in the design
collection in the case of video games
acquired as designed we had the same
conundrum so at the beginning we've
decided not to have video games like
Grand Theft Auto even though they're
super masterpieces but we might open it
up but you realize that all these
different discussions make it so much
more interesting they're very
questionable they're open for debate and
they make our position much more fertile
also for communication as was the choice
to show the video games without any
nostalgia interference no arcade
cabinets we acquire all the hardware but
we try to show only the screen in the
same size that it was at the beginning
for instance for snake we're trying we
want to acquire snake and we're looking
at the old Motorola screen we don't know
how I'll do it but we're thinking about
it and and of course you know the
controller because that's part of the
interaction but nothing else it was a
choice that I thought would create a lot
of trouble instead people in the gaming
community understood this position
and respected it once again time will
tell but it's a way to go the funny
thing was the reaction we were talking
about Picasso and videogames so Jonathan
Jones from The Guardian was the first
was our critic - Thunder pac-man is not
Picasso okay well maybe in a few years
when people will think that Batman was
like Picasso maybe at his time Picasso
was also considered not worthy of
inclusion in the museum but what was
really interesting is that there was all
this amazing and quite unjustified
positioning against video games as if
they were the devil and the Antichrist
and you know how sometimes when you get
a bad review you hurt because we all
hurt I mean I'm a thin-skinned as any of
you you know it really usually is
something that hurts this particular
time I was so embarrassed for the guy
because but truly it was so embarrassing
to have that position that I was not
hurting I was just like what do I do
nothing but thankfully the Guardian
itself reacted and people from the
Guardian wrote a rebuttal to their own
our critic saying well are video games
art the debate that shouldn't be like
please you know just like go take care
of something else cuz that's really not
something that you need to talk about
and then John Maeda chimed in without me
saying anything and he just like say yes
the video games should be at MoMA okay
great so the whole debate was continuing
but this is one commentary that I think
you this audience will appreciate
particularly a lot look at the very very
bottom I have to redo this slide because
it's hard to read it's a fascinating
debate are video games art but the
answer to the above question are the do
games art is put bluntly no video games
aren't art because they are quite
thoroughly something else
cold code ah excuse me
I mean how dumb is it to say something
like this like because it's not art
because it's oil paint so it really
it's just amazing so this brought me
back I want to show you something to
tell you it's happened before
these were things where there were
objects foreign loans to the exhibition
cubism and abstract art that was in the
1930s at MoMA they were stopped by the
US Customs because they would not
believe that that was art so see it
happens it happens and it's wonderful to
be in the position of pushing the
envelope right you know we talked about
the great auction that Lindsey and Megan
and everybody else organized a phillips
of digital art more recently there was
an artsy auction of algorithm you know
it would be interesting to discuss it
with you but because of course there's a
lot to discuss but it was interesting
because the algorithm as an art form was
introduced on the stage also and it's
something that we will discuss more in
the future but there really has to do
with a need to be as open and possible
to the ambivalence and ambiguity of
Contemporary Art and Design
so civic engagement and intent
entanglement creative encoding and
incubating the arts and trying to
understand what it is that quantum
computers really do that is my quest for
the next few years and also remembering
that there are professions more harmful
than Industrial Design but only a very
few of them this is Victor papinek and
together with you I hope to burn even
more chairs in order to free the world
from the old forms of design thank you
very much